Kinetics ofjuvenile sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax, L.)
systemic and mucosal antibody secreting cell response
to different antigens (Photobacterium damselae spp.
piscicida, Vibrio anguillarum and DNP)

NUNO M. S. DOS SANTOSLQ, J. J. TAVERNE-THIELE], ANDREW C. BARNES},
ANTHONY E. ELLIS3 AND JAN H. W. M. ROMBOUTZ
1Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Porto, Rua do Campo
Alegre, 823 4150 Porto, Portugal, 2Cell Biology and Immunology Group,
Wageningen Institute of Animal Sciences, Wageningen University,
P.O. Box 338, 6700 AH Wageningen, The Netherlands, and 3Marine
Laboratory Aberdeen, PO Box 101, Victoria Road, Aberdeen ABII 9DB,
Scotland, UK.

(Received 24 March 2000, accepted after revision 16 October 2000)
The ELISPOT assay was used to measure the number of speciﬁc antibody
secreting cells (ASC) induced during the primary and secondary immune
responses in the spleen, head kidney and gut of juvenile (5 g) sea bass
(Dicentrarchus labrax) to bacterial (Vibrio anguillarum and Photobacterium
damselae ssp. piscicida) and hapten dinitrophenyl-conjugated to keyhole
limpet haemocyanin (DNP-KLH) antigens administered intraperitoneally.
High variability among individuals was observed at each sampling day. All
ﬁsh were bath vaccinated to V. anguillarum at an earlier stage (2 g) in the
farm of origin prior to the development of the experiments, and therefore only
secondary and tertiary responses were measured in the group immunised with
this bacterium. Signiﬁcant differences t0 the controls were observed in the
primary responses of the head kidney and the spleen to P. damselae ssp.
piscicida and DNP, respectively. Frequency analysis of the production of ASC
suggests that signiﬁcant responses in the gut might be masked by the high
error variance. The peak of the primary response was observed 4 days earlier
to DNP (18*20 days post-immunisation) and it was signiﬁcantly higher than
the response to P. damselae ssp. piscicida. Higher numbers of ASC were
observed in the secondary responses of the head kidney and spleen, although
they were not statistically signiﬁcantly different from the primary levels,
probably due to the high error variance as supported by the frequency
analysis. Nevertheless, together with a faster response (peak at 7 days
post-immunisation), the data suggest that memory formation had occurred.
Additionally, the data suggest that some suppression of the secondary immune
response in the gut might have occurred. The head kidney appears to produce
the highest number of speciﬁc ASC of the organs tested. It appears that sea

bass show a relatively fast but short duration antibody response.

'(j, 2001 Academic Press
Key words: ﬁsh, sea bass, Dicentrarchus labrax, ELISPOT, antibody-
secreting cells, kinetics, Photobacterium damselae ssp. piscicida,

Vibrio anguillarum, DNP-KLH.


