The kinetics of the hypoferraemic response and changes
in levels of alternative complement activity in diploid ant
triploid Atlantic salmon, following injection of
lipopolysaccharide
A. L. LANGSTONT, R. JOHNSTONE AND A. E. ELLIs*

Marine Laboratory, Victoria Road, Aberdeen ABII 9DB, Scotland, U.K.
(Received 2 June 2000, accepted after revision 18 October 2000)

To study any possible effects of triploidy on the kinetics of the response of two
non-speciﬁc disease factors, full sibling diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon
were injected intraperitoneally with either lipopolysaccharide (1 mg kg’1
body weight) or saline. Individually marked ﬁsh were repetitively blood
sampled for up to 19 days. Total serum protein concentrations remained
constant throughout the experiment indicating that the sampling regime did
not cause haemodilution. The alternative complement pathway activity
(measured by the titre of haemolytic activity against rabbit erythrocytes) in
the serum of saline injected ﬁsh remained constant but in LPS-injected ﬁsh it
fell to barely detectable levels 2 days after injection, but recovered t0
pre-treatment levels by about day 5. Triploid ﬁsh took slightly longer to reach
full recovery levels than diploids. All groups of ﬁsh showed a hypoferraemic
response, suggesting that the sampling regime was at least partially respon-
sible. However, the response was more rapid and pronounced in the LPS-
injected ﬁsh. In the latter, serum iron concentrations decreased t0 very low
levels by day 2 post-injection in the diploid ﬁsh and by day 3 in the triploid
ﬁsh. Pre-treatment iron levels were reestablished by about 15 days post-
injection in all groups. The data show only slight differences between the
diploid and triploid ﬁsh, but the longer time taken for the triploids to recover
complement activity and the slower onset of the hypoferraemic response
following injection of LPS, suggest that they may be at a disadvantage
compared with their diploid siblings in their defence against bacterial
infections.  200] Academic Press
Key words: diploid, triploid, Atlantic salmon, non-speciﬁc immunity, LPS.

I. Introduction
Previous investigations into the constitutive levels of various non-speciﬁ
humoral defence factors of diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon have shov
little difference between the two ploidy states (Langston, 1999). This has a1;
been shown to be the case in other species of ﬁsh (Kusuda et al., 199
Yamamoto & Iida, 1995a). The comparative susceptibility to diseases of diplo
and triploid ﬁsh is still debated, but the majority of published literature sh0\

*Corresponding author.
J[Present address: HSRU, University 0f Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD.


